MSCXXXX: Add an MSC for a new Widget API action to read related events from a matrix room (#3869)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3869-widgetapi-read-event-relations.md

The `room_id` parameter specifies the room to look within. When undefined, the client should look in
the user's currently viewed room.

The `rel_type` parameter specifies the relationship type of child events to search for. If not
defined, all types will be returned.

The `event_type` parameter specifies the type of child events to search for. If not defined, all
types will be returned.

The `limit`, `from`, and `to` parameters work like described in
([MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md)).

The `direction` parameter is used to specify the direction to search for relations. It has the same
semantic as defined by ([MSC3715](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3715)).

This is an example of a minimal request to get an event from the current room:

```json
{
  "api": "fromWidget",
  "widgetId": "20200827_WidgetExample",
  "requestid": "generated-id-1234",
  "action": "read_relations",
  "data": {
    "event_id": "$event-id"
  }
}
```

If the widget doesn't have appropriate permission, or an error occurs anywhere along the send path,
a standardized widget error response is returned.

> If the request was successful, the client sends the following response:

Reviewer: something along the lines of:
```suggestion
Widgets can rely on the complete relation lists.
The client is responsible to fetch all missing events form the matrix server.
If the request was successful, the client sends the following response:
```

> If the request was successful, the client sends the following response:

Author: You mean that the client could also respond to this with a local cache of the relations? I implied that it should always get it from CS-API because it's also how it is (and was already) implemented in the `matrix-js-sdk`/Element. But it might be a good idea to clarify it here.

of events. If undefined, there are no more events to receive.

The `prev_batch` field is a cursor that can be used in the `from` or `to` fields to get the previous
page of events. If undefined, there are no more events to receive.

## Potential issues

In an e2ee room, all the events must be decrypted in the client prior to applying the filters or
providing them to the widget. This can take a considerable amount of time. The widget should take
care that it selects a reasonable `limit` to not run into timeouts in the widget transport layer.

## Alternatives

We could also add features to let the client "scroll up the room", i.e. trigger the pagination for a
room timeline and stick with the original read interfaces. However, this would potentially load a
lot of unrelated events which slows the read process down. In addition, the client must potentially
decrypt all the messages in the room before being able to filter them accordingly. Using the relations
feature, the decryption problem is still present, but the set of events that must be decrypted and
searched is minimized.

The same limitations would apply if we would consider to provide direct access to the

> `GET /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/messages` endpoint.

Author: Not sure what you mean here. Filters won't work for e2e encryption because one would need to read and decrypt every message in the room to decide it which is not practical. But we could add a comment to clarify it.

([MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md))
to solve this use case. Related events reference each other by a `rel_type` and the client-server API
provides an endpoint to receive server-aggregated relations.

Having this API available to widgets, it could (1) access existing events to e.g. show an enhanced view
of the polls feature or (2) read own events for a custom use case such as a whiteboard application.

## Proposal

We will add a new interface to the widget API to get all relations of an event with a known event id.
We won't introduce new capabilities but instead rely on the capabilities that were introduced by
[MSC2762](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2762).

The following rules apply:

1. If the requested event-id belongs to a event, and the widget didn't receive the respective
   `m.receive.event:<event type>` or `m.receive.state_event:<event type>` capability, the widget
   rejects the request.
2. The list of related events only include events that the widget has the respective
   `m.receive.event:<event type>` or `m.receive.state_event:<event type>` capability for. Other

>    events are silently ignored.

Reviewer 2: I think this would make it more clear that the client is the one that 'ignores' the events, rather than the widget:

```suggestion
   events are silently dropped.
```

    "limit": 50,
    "from": "from_token",
    "to": "to_token",
    "direction": "b"
  }
}
```

Under `data`, all keys are a representation of the
`_matrix/client/v1/rooms/{roomID}/relations/{event_id}[/{rel_type}[/{event_type}]]` API that was
introduced by
([MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md)).
This also includes the paging parameters.

The `event_id` parameter is a required parameter that represents the parent event to be read.

The `room_id` parameter specifies the room to look within. When undefined, the client should look in
the user's currently viewed room.

The `rel_type` parameter specifies the relationship type of child events to search for. If not
defined, all types will be returned.

The `event_type` parameter specifies the type of child events to search for. If not defined, all
types will be returned.

The `limit`, `from`, and `to` parameters work like described in
([MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md)).

The `direction` parameter is used to specify the direction to search for relations. It has the same

> semantic as defined by ([MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md)).

Reviewer 2: I'm failing to find the `direction` parameter in either MSC2675 or the specification.

Author: You're right. I mixed up the MSC numbers. I meant [MSC3715](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3715).

It is available as an experimental option in synapse:

https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/3dd175b628bab5638165f20de9eade36a4e88147/synapse/rest/client/relations.py#L59-L67

And also part of the `fetchRelations` function in the `matrix-js-sdk` where I come across it. Though the name of the query parameter doesn't match with the synapse implementation 🤔:

https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/8502759e3ee3a2b244a442b8dac2b67809d9270e/src/client.ts#L7298

We don't have a real use case for this feature, yet. So we could as well skip it for now. It also seems like the MSC in question [isn't final yet](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3715#discussion_r931343116).

Reviewer 2: Hm, well I guess it's ultimately up to you whether to include the parameter, since MSC3715 is fairly close to FCP

Author: Then let's keep it in and hope that it becomes stable in synapse and get's fixed in the `matrix-js-sdk` so we can actually use it. It is also useful because then the `relations(...)` endpoint in the `RoomWidgetClient` will also be fully functioning.

Reviewer 3: > And also part of the `fetchRelations` function in the `matrix-js-sdk` where I come across it. Though the name of the query parameter doesn't match with the synapse implementation 🤔:
> 
> [matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk@8502759/src/client.ts#L7298](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-js-sdk/blob/8502759e3ee3a2b244a442b8dac2b67809d9270e/src/client.ts#L7298)

This is vector-im/element-web#22501, I believe.

This is an example of a minimal request to get an event from the current room:

```json
{
  "api": "fromWidget",
  "widgetId": "20200827_WidgetExample",
  "requestid": "generated-id-1234",
  "action": "read_relations",
  "data": {
    "event_id": "$event-id"
  }
}
```

> The client SHOULD NOT modify the data of the request. The widget is responsible for producing valid
> events - the client MUST pass through any errors, such as permission errors, to the widget using the
> standard error response in the Widget API.

Reviewer 2: I think we should be careful to not imply that the client shouldn't do any validation of the request at all. I'd suggest a slightly different wording:

```suggestion
The client SHOULD NOT modify the data of the request. Given that the widget produces a valid
request, the client MUST pass through any errors, such as permission errors, to the widget using the
standard error response in the Widget API.
```

Author: I copied it from I think MSC2762. I also hesitated to add it here because it looks more like a kind of a general rule on how the widget interaction works in general. Maybe we can just leave it out.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense, I think I'd still be favor of changing the wording even if it is copied from MSC2762, but if you want to keep it or leave it out, that's also fine.
